design: Service APIs implementation (#3213)
projectcontour/contour: design/service-apis-implementation.md

# Service-APIs implementation design

> Status: Accepted

Author: Well, I figured that if we merge it, it's accepted. Otherwise, this will get closed. Traditionally, we've just not updated this field, and everything is a draft, which is also not ideal. :)

> Status: Accepted

Reviewer: We could just drop the field, and assume anything that's been merged is accepted; anything still a PR is draft. Not a big deal though.

> Status: Accepted

Reviewer 2: The original idea was to submit ideas here without them being "accepted" yet, to gather thoughts, etc. We've been waiting to commit the design until it's accepted in a way, so removing the field might better follow how we're implementing features.

> Status: Accepted

Author: Yeah, removing the field may make more sense, if it's merged, it's accepted. If we change things like that, we'll need to:
- update the template and remove the field
- update CONTRIBUTING.md/ other policy docs
- update the old PRs to remove the field.

- Cluster operator: The cluster operator (ops) is responsible for administration of entire clusters. They manage policies, network access, application permissions.
- Application developer: The application developer (dev) is responsible for defining their application configuration (e.g. timeouts, request matching/filter) and Service composition (e.g. path routing to backends).

The cluster operator and application developer are basically the same as Contour's Cluster Administrator and Application Developer personas, which will be important for this design.

In terms of the APIs themsleves, the Service APIs have 3 primary API resources (taken from the service-apis docs site):

- GatewayClass defines a set of gateways with a common configuration and behavior.
- Gateway requests a point where traffic can be translated to Services within the cluster.
- Routes describe how traffic coming via the Gateway maps to the Services.

In Contour, we've previously solved a lot of the same problems with HTTPProxy (and IngressRoute before it).

> That functionality can be described in the Service APIs by HTTPRoutes, HTTPSRoutes and TLSRoutes, as they describe Layer 7 ingress, as Contour does today.

Reviewer 3: doesn't look like it: https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/service-apis/httproute/#spec (TLS optional)

> That functionality can be described in the Service APIs by HTTPRoutes, HTTPSRoutes and TLSRoutes, as they describe Layer 7 ingress, as Contour does today.

Author: 🤦 Yeah, that should just be `HTTPRoutes` and `TLSRoutes`, for terminated and passthrough traffic respectively.

Other types of routes include TCPRoutes and UDPRoutes, which are intended for Layer 4 load balancers. Implementations may also define their own Route objects, at the cost of interoperability.

In terms of its stated goals, Contour is aiming at being an ingress controller - that is, a Layer 7 proxy with some api gateway functions.
Currently, Contour provides "TCP Proxying" that allows the forwarding of TLS streams based on the SNI information, which is precisely what the Service APIs TLSRoute object is for.

> If Project Contour (the organisation) does add support for TCP and UDP forwarding, it will not be in the `projectcontour/contour` repo, but will be a separate repo.

Reviewer 2: I'm still confused on the practically of this, you're proposing that we recreate all the same logic to just watch for these two types (e.g. TCP / UDP)?

Author: I'd guess that as part of this, we'd spin some code out into libraries, probably.

## Goals
- Define a data model and implementation for Contour's service-apis support.
- Layer 7 support only, which means HTTPRoutes, HTTPSRoutes, and TLSRoutes only.

## Non Goals
- No TCPRoute or UDPRoute support, that is, no support for arbitrary TCP/UDP forwarding.

## High-Level Design

### Service APIs implementation surface area

Contour's support for the Service APIs will include support for the HTTPRoute and TLSRoute objects only, not any other type of Route - this includes no TCPRoute or UDPRoute support.
Contour is a layer 7 ingress controller, and the layer 4 load balancing implies by TCPRoute and UDPRoute is out of scope for this tool (that is, `projectcontour/contour`).
Project Contour (the organisation) may investigate a Service-APIs based layer 4 solution in the future, but that effort will not be in `projectcontour/contour`.

### Contour Gateway model

> Contour considers a GatewayClass and associated set of Gateways to describe a single Envoy deployment, deployed and managed by something outside of itself.

Reviewer: can you remind me of the scenario where a Contour user would have more than one `Gateway`?

Reviewer 3: Looks like we have significant conflicts between the operator proposal and this one: https://github.com/projectcontour/contour-operator/pull/171/files#diff-1cbda5ba0844ea1d442d220ece0cd2f53066104e33808dffb0b7d8df6c2ff5d8R106

Reviewer 3: cc @danehans

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/projectcontour/contour-operator/pull/171/files#diff-1cbda5ba0844ea1d442d220ece0cd2f53066104e33808dffb0b7d8df6c2ff5d8R114

Author: As discussed in our maintainer meeting, Contour will move to being configured to check a *specific*, named by namespace and name Gateway only. This is because of this line. I'll update this to make it clearer.

So, currently, Ingress is overwritten by HTTPProxy, so if an Ingress and a HTTPProxy specify the exact same route, the HTTPProxy will win.

Once we have the Service-APIs available as well, we have to choose the order.
In this design, I suggest having the order be Ingress is overwritten by HTTPProxy, is overwritten by the service-apis.
I could see reversing HTTPProxy and the Service APIs here, but I think this acknowledges that the Service APIs are really an evolution of the ideas in HTTPProxy, and will probably end up being the community standard.

### Status management

Each object in the Service APIs set has its own status definition. In general, Contour will update the status of any object that comes into scope with its details, ensuring that the `observedGeneration` field is set correctly.
When objects fall out of scope, any status set by Contour will not be removed.
It's expected that things that check the status will also check the `observedGeneration` to check if the status information is up-to-date with the current object generation.

### Per-object design notes

#### GatewayClass

> Contour will look for entries with `spec.controller` equal to `projectcontour.io/contour` by default.

Reviewer 4: @youngnick if contour operator is responsible for managing `GatewayClass`, then I would expect the value to be `projectcontour.io/contour-operator`. See https://github.com/projectcontour/contour-operator/pull/171 for additional details.

Author: As discussed in our maintainer meeting, the controller default will be `projectcontour.io/contour`, which will be overridden by the operator to `projectcontour.io/contour-operator`. This is because the Operator is one way to install Contour and Envoy and an associated Gateway, but not the only one.

I'll clarify the properties that Contour expects a Gateway to have.

Contour can change this value to any `projectcontour.io/<value>` with a config setting (similar to how `ingress.class` works today.)
Importantly, this means that changing this values requires a Contour restart; this means that the GatewayClass watcher can have this value baked in at runtime.

> If Contour finds more than one matching GatewayClass, this is a conflict, and Contour will use the oldest GatewayClass (by creation timestamp).

Reviewer: it looks like the "oldest object wins" strategy is used in a few places - are there any alternatives? why did you choose this strategy?

Reviewer 3: seems to be some mention of oldest-wins here as well: https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/service-apis/httproute/#tls (notes section)

Reviewer: just found https://kubernetes-sigs.github.io/service-apis/guidelines/#conflicts as well which explicitly mentions this as a principle

Author: Yes, this is why I picked this, I think that oldest object wins is about the best we can hope for here.

All GatewayClasses will be updated with status conditions indicating if they are in use.

The output of this watcher is a list of GatewayClass name/namespace details.

#### Gateway
Contour will watch for entries with known GatewayClass name/namespace details, from the previous watch.

> Contour is not able to specify the address that the Envoy deployment will listen on, and so having any entries in Gateway's `spec.addresses` stanza will result in Contour marking those addresses as invalid in the Gateway's status.

Reviewer 4: The contour-operator will attempt to set these addresses and surface a status condition accordingly. See https://github.com/projectcontour/contour-operator/pull/171/files#r552860708 for add'l background.

Contour expects the `spec.addresses` field to be empty.

For Listeners:

> - Listeners inside Gateways will be merged where possible, as will listeners across Gateways.

Reviewer 2: Contour only supports two listeners today (e.g. http/https). Does this statement assume that you are permitted to create more dynamically?

Author: The insecure/secure split definitely needs some thinking as a result of this. The initial  thought is that we would replicate the current behavior, which would mean accepting only one http and one https listener, but this will be tricky to do. We may need to do something different with automatic http->https redirect for the Service APIs.

Author: I've opened #3263 with a new design for this, and will update this document accordingly.

- Conflicts within a Gateway will result in the relevant Listeners both being rejected.
- Conflicts between Gateways will result in the oldest Gateway (by creation timestamp) being kept.
- The rejected Listener will have its status updated with the reason and the name of the conflicting Gateway.

> - Listeners are considered conflicting if all the fields out of `hostname`, `port`, `protocol`, and `tls` match.

Reviewer 2: Could TLS listeners also be in conflict if they reference different certificates?

Reviewer 3: relevant: https://github.com/projectcontour/contour/pull/3213/files#r552799600

Author: I think I've covered this in a recent update, please tell me if it's clearer now.

Listeners that match on ProtocolType and PortNumber can be merged, using Hostname as a discriminator.

TODO: There are some edge cases to check into here because TLS config can be specified both here and in the Route.
Also need to check for if you can mix-and-match between Routes and here, using here as a fallback?

### HTTPRoute

### TLSRoute

### Other concerns

TODO: What do we do about updating status information? Probably just rely on whatever provisions Envoy to put the reachability info in the Gateway Status.

For each object, I need to specify:
How the watch will work
Where the integration will be plumbed
How do we handle the inter-related dynamic configuration?

A detailed design describing how the changes to the product should be made.

The names of types, fields, interfaces, and methods should be agreed on here, not debated in code review.
The same applies to changes in CRDs, YAML examples, and so on.

Ideally the changes should be made in sequence so that the work required to implement this design can be done incrementally, possibly in parallel.

## Alternatives Considered

> TODO: This will need further explanation of what the solution would look like if we didn't make one GatewayClass == One Contour.

Reviewer 4: The contour-operator [design doc](https://github.com/projectcontour/contour-operator/pull/171/files) more closely aligns with this alternative approach. An instance of Contour (i.e. Contour Deployment, Envoy DaemonSet, etc.) equals one Gateway. GatewayClass is simply a resource that points to an implementation-specific config object, i.e. `ContourConfig`. Contour will only be concerned with xRoute resources and using `xroute.spec.gateways[]` to know if it's responsible for handling the route.

Author: I think we cleared this up in a maintainer's meeting, now that the Contour installation (= Contour deployment and Envoy DaemonSet and associated bits) is 1-to-1 with a named Gateway.

- Gateway requests a point where traffic can be translated to Services within the cluster, using an internal Listener construct.
- Routes describe how traffic coming via the Gateway maps to the Services.

In Contour, we've previously solved a lot of the same problems with HTTPProxy (and IngressRoute before it).
That functionality can be described in the Service APIs by HTTPRoutes and TLSRoutes, as they describe Layer 7 ingress, as Contour does today.

Other types of routes include TCPRoutes and UDPRoutes, which are intended for Layer 4 load balancers. Implementations may also define their own Route objects, at the cost of interoperability.

In terms of its stated goals, Contour is aiming at being an ingress controller - that is, a Layer 7 proxy with some api gateway functions.
Currently, Contour provides "TCP Proxying" that allows the forwarding of TLS streams based on the SNI information, which is precisely what the Service APIs TLSRoute object is for.
If Project Contour (the organisation) does add support for TCP and UDP forwarding, it will not be in the `projectcontour/contour` repo, but will be a separate repo.

> ## Goals

Reviewer: is it a goal for Contour's service-apis support to reach ~feature parity with `HTTPProxy`? If so, how will we implement features that aren't explicitly part of the service-apis spec? And if not, what set of features _do_ we expect to implement?

Another way of asking this is, are we going to use annotations to implement features that aren't directly a part of service-apis, like we do with Ingress?

Author: I'll put something in the background to summarise this, but:
- I think the goal should absolutely be that eventually service-apis has feature parity with HTTPProxy
- the upstream does not have support for many features right now
- we should implement what is implementable right now
- we should collaborate with upstream to work out what features are part of the core, extension, and implementation specific sections of service-apis.

The service-apis are specifically built with extension points so you don't have to use annotations. That's what the reference points that allow you to point to any object, but default to a specific kind, are for.

### Interrelated watches

The Service APIs are a set of interrelated Kubernetes objects, where a change in one object can mean that the scope of objects Contour is interested in will change.
Because of this, Contour will watch all events associated with its named Gateway, HTTPRoute, TLSRoute, and BackendPolicy objects, and filter the objects it takes action on internally, rather than using a filtered watch (as those are costly to set up and tear down).

Contour does not watch a GatewayClass, as its deployment model expects a Contour to be part of the implementation for a *particular* Gateway.

### Combining Service APIs with other configuration

When it calculates the Envoy configuration using the DAG, Contour layers different types of configuration in order.
So, currently, Ingress is overwritten by HTTPProxy, so if an Ingress and a HTTPProxy specify the exact same route, the HTTPProxy will win.

Once we have the Service-APIs available as well, we have to choose the order.
In this design, I suggest having the order be Ingress is overwritten by HTTPProxy, is overwritten by the service-apis.

> I could see reversing HTTPProxy and the Service APIs here, but I think this acknowledges that the Service APIs are really an evolution of the ideas in HTTPProxy, and will probably end up being the community standard.

Reviewer: I'm OK with either order, as long as we document it.

> I could see reversing HTTPProxy and the Service APIs here, but I think this acknowledges that the Service APIs are really an evolution of the ideas in HTTPProxy, and will probably end up being the community standard.

Reviewer: Is it a goal to eventually sunset `HTTPProxy` and have service APIs be the only API for Contour? If not yet a goal, do we think it might be some day? Just curious how others are thinking about this, and whether we expect to support multiple APIs indefinitely or if we hope to converge on one.

Author: I'd like to think that, if the Service APIs had full feature parity with HTTPProxy, and our users were willing to move, we would remove the CRD.

I don't think either of those is likely though, so what I'm trying to do is behave as though that might be the case someday. Practically, I don't think it will be, but I'm not convinced of the benefit of having our own CRD if the above two conditions are fulfilled.

For Listeners:
- Listeners inside Gateways will be merged where possible.
- Listeners that specify a port that the Contour controller considers the default secure port will have a HTTP->HTTPS redirect created for them.
- Listeners that specify a port that is not exposed via the Envoy service will be rejected.
- Conflicts within a Gateway will result in the relevant Listeners both being rejected (as there is no way to determine which one was first).
- Listeners are considered mergable if all the fields out of `hostname`, `port`, and `protocol` match, with some additional rules around TLS.
- Further merging rules are specified in the detailed design below.
- Listeners that refer to any other Route than HTTPRoute or TLSRoute will be ignored, and a condition placed on the corresponding `status.listeners[]` object saying that it was ignored because those objects are not supported.

The output of this watcher is both Envoy configuration, and a list of kind/name/namespace details for Routes to watch.

Contour will only update the `status` of Gateway objects.

### HTTPRoute

> Contour will watch all HTTPRoute objects, and filter for entries matching a label selector in a valid Gateway `spec.listeners[].routes`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contour will watch all HTTPRoute objects, and filter for entries matching a label selector in its configured Gateway's `spec.listeners[].routes`,
```

and will configure the associated routes.
Configuration of HTTPRoutes will be subject to the rules around the `RouteGateways` field.

TODO: Details about RouteTLSConfig.

Contour will only ever update the `status` of HTTPRoute objects.

Errors or conflicts here will render that section of the config invalid.
Other valid sections will still be passed to Envoy.
For each invalid section, Contour will update status information with the section and the reason.

The output of this watcher is Envoy configuration.

### TLSRoute

> Contour will watch all TLSRoute objects, and filter for entries matching a label selector in a valid Gateway `spec.listeners[].routes`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contour will watch all TLSRoute objects, and filter for entries matching a label selector in its configured Gateway's`spec.listeners[].routes`,
```

Other types of routes include TCPRoutes and UDPRoutes, which are intended for Layer 4 load balancers. Implementations may also define their own Route objects, at the cost of interoperability.

In terms of its stated goals, Contour is aiming at being an ingress controller - that is, a Layer 7 proxy with some api gateway functions.
Currently, Contour provides "TCP Proxying" that allows the forwarding of TLS streams based on the SNI information, which is precisely what the Service APIs TLSRoute object is for.
If Project Contour (the organisation) does add support for TCP and UDP forwarding, it will not be in the `projectcontour/contour` repo, but will be a separate repo.

This design is intended to cover the initial `v1alpha1` release of the Service APIs. We will aim to implement the core featureset of the APIs at that point.
We will then work with the upstream community on features that Contour and HTTPProxy currently support, but the Service APIs do not, and how best to represent those features in the APIs.
So, there are some features that are currently gaps for Contour (wildcard domain names, and exact path matching seem like big ones),

> and some that Contour supports that the Service APIs do not (webscokets, configurable timeouts, header replacement, external auth, rate limiting, and so on).

Reviewer 2: nit: s/webscokets/websockets/

## Goals
- Define a data model and implementation for Contour's service-apis support, covering the v1alpha1 version of the service-apis.
- Layer 7 support only, which means HTTPRoutes, TLSRoutes only.

## Non Goals
- No TCPRoute or UDPRoute support, that is, no support for arbitrary TCP/UDP forwarding.

## High-Level Design

### Service APIs implementation surface area

Contour's support for the Service APIs will include support for the HTTPRoute and TLSRoute objects only, not any other type of Route - this includes no TCPRoute or UDPRoute support.
Contour is a layer 7 ingress controller, and the layer 4 load balancing implies by TCPRoute and UDPRoute is out of scope for this tool (that is, `projectcontour/contour`).
Project Contour (the organisation) may investigate a Service-APIs based layer 4 solution in the future, but that effort will not be in `projectcontour/contour`.

### Contour Gateway model

Contour considers a Gateway to describe a single Envoy deployment, deployed and managed by something outside of itself.

> Contour expects to be supplied with the full name (name and namespace) of a single Gateway, which it will watch and update the status of.

Reviewer 2: Do you see this as new flags to Contour or placed into the config file?

Author: I think config file for this one, I'll update.

Contour will watch all HTTPRoute objects, and filter for entries matching a label selector in its configured Gateway's `spec.listeners[].routes`,
and will configure the associated routes.
Configuration of HTTPRoutes will be subject to the rules around the `RouteGateways` field.

TODO: Details about RouteTLSConfig.

Contour will only ever update the `status` of HTTPRoute objects.

Errors or conflicts here will render that section of the config invalid.
Other valid sections will still be passed to Envoy.
For each invalid section, Contour will update status information with the section and the reason.

The output of this watcher is Envoy configuration.

### TLSRoute
Contour will watch all TLSRoute objects, and filter for entries matching a label selector in its configured Gateway's `spec.listeners[].routes`,
and will configure the associated routes.
Configuration of TLSRoutes  will be subject to the rules around the `RouteGateways` field.

Contour will only ever update the `status` of TLSRoute objects.

Errors or conflicts here will render that section of the config invalid.
Other valid sections will still be passed to Envoy.

The output of this watcher is Envoy configuration.

> ## Detailed Design

Reviewer: do we want to have one DAG processor for all service-apis objects? One per object type (e.g. `GatewayProcessor`, `HTTPRouteProcessor`, etc)? Something else?

Author: I'm not sure. I think that splitting the processors up would be a bit different to how we've done things before, but that's not necessarily bad. It's probably worth the implementor giving this a go.

Reviewer: :+1:

#### Hostname matching

In many of the Service APIs objects, Hostnames *may* be specified, and *may* be either "precise" (a domain name without the terminating dot of a network host), or "wildcard" (a domain name prefixed with a single wildcard label).
Per the API spec, only the first DNS label of the hostname may be a wildcard, and the wildcard must match only a single label.

Hostnames are considered to match if they exactly match, or if a precise hostname matches the suffix of a wildcard hostname (that is, if they match after the first DNS label is discarded.)

This DNS matching is referred to in this proposal as a "domain match", as opposed to an "exact match", which is string equality only.

### Gateway

When ingesting Gateways, Contour will import the configured named Gateway into its cache, and watch it for spec changes. Spec changes will trigger a DAG run.

#### Listener Ports

Contour allows the configuration of arbitrary ports, **as long as those ports are exposed via the Envoy service**.
The port that is configured for the listener is the port as it appears at the Service.

> That is, the Envoy Service `port` number is what the Listener must specify, regardless of if there is a `targetPort` set on the Service.

Reviewer 3: Maybe a comment somewhere making it explicit that we will start watching the Envoy service would be good to add. Also it forces users (cluster operators?) to deploy their Envoys in a certain way. Practically speaking its unlikely someone had their Envoys deployed much differently than we have in the examples or the operator, but it is technically a new constraint I guess? Maybe not that serious

Author: I've updated this quite a bit to reflect the fact that we're not going to allow arbitrary ports for now. There's definitely a problem that will need to be solved with some experimentation during implementation here.

Model-wise, it seems to be intended that a Gateway represents the actual thing that takes traffic and transforms it so it can get to the requested Pods.
In Contour's case, this is Envoy, and it's extremely difficult to design a model where a single Envoy deployment could handle multiple different Gateway specs.

Also, this model makes interacting with the Contour Operator much harder.
In the model we've chosen, the Operator takes the Gateway as a request for an Envoy installation, with matching Contour installation.
As part of that, Contour is requested to look at one and only one Gateway, which contradicts the "watches multiple Gateways" model.

## Implementation

There is currently experimental support for *reading* the Service-APIs objects in Contour, we will add full support in something like this order:
- Add support for configuring Gateway to the config file
- Deprecate `--expermental-service-apis` command-line flag, so that it does nothing but log a referral to the new config item.
- Implement the Service-APIs processor as a single DAG processor.
- Release a version with Service-APIs support still marked experimental.

> - Remove the experimental tag once we're happy with the support.

Reviewer 3: Might be worth adding some notes about how before this stage we will try to evaluate our implementation and work with upstream to work out issues, conformance testing, etc.

- Layer 7 support only, which means HTTPRoutes, TLSRoutes only.

## Non Goals
- No TCPRoute or UDPRoute support, that is, no support for arbitrary TCP/UDP forwarding.

## High-Level Design

### Service APIs implementation surface area

Contour's support for the Service APIs will include support for the HTTPRoute and TLSRoute objects only, not any other type of Route - this includes no TCPRoute or UDPRoute support.
Contour is a layer 7 ingress controller, and the layer 4 load balancing implies by TCPRoute and UDPRoute is out of scope for this tool (that is, `projectcontour/contour`).
Project Contour (the organisation) may investigate a Service-APIs based layer 4 solution in the future, but that effort will not be in `projectcontour/contour`.

### Contour Gateway model

Contour considers a Gateway to describe a single Envoy deployment, deployed and managed by something outside of itself.
Contour expects to be supplied with the full name (name and namespace) of a single Gateway, which it will watch and update the status of.
This will be a configuration file parameter.

> When a Gateway is not supplied, Contour will not do Service-APIs processing, or in other words, the existing `--experimental-service-apis` flag will be obsoleted and removed).

Reviewer 2: +1 on removing the flag. 

Should we default the name/namespace of a gateway (i.e. contour/projectcontour) so given a generic deployment, someone could use that as a default and not require a config file change?

Contour can still check if the service-apis CRDs exist in the cluster and use that as a key for setting up informers.  I just merged https://github.com/projectcontour/contour/pull/3283 which acts this way, but is different than this design doc, but @skriss asked which is a good point.

Author: So, the flow if you want to use the service-apis is this:
- install the objects in the cluster
- create a Gateway for Contour to reference
- Configure Contour to use that

If you don't do all those three things, then no service-apis.

That does make sense, although it means that if you install the objects and don't change the default, we should end up logging something saying "hey, you asked me to look for a Gateway called `projectcontour/contour`, but it doesn't exist". Not a huge deal.

Reviewer 2: Right now I have a default programmed, but we could remove that, just thought it might be nice to have some way of allowing someone to create a Gateway without needing to reconfigure / restart Contour. 

This came up in a review with @skriss and thought it was a good point that what I PR'd conflicted with this design and thought we should clear up. =)

Inside Contour will merge Listeners within its Gateway. (See the detailed design for the exact rules Contour will use for this.)

### Interrelated watches

The Service APIs are a set of interrelated Kubernetes objects, where a change in one object can mean that the scope of objects Contour is interested in will change.
Because of this, Contour will watch all events associated with its named Gateway, HTTPRoute, TLSRoute, and BackendPolicy objects, and filter the objects it takes action on internally, rather than using a filtered watch (as those are costly to set up and tear down).

> Contour does not watch a GatewayClass, as its deployment model expects a Contour to be part of the implementation for a *particular* Gateway.

Reviewer 2: If we did watch the class, we could allow a single gateway in a cluster to be configured by a single contour without any configuration file changes. But when a second Gateway for the same class controller was created you'd need to specify.

Would just be nice to allow users to configure Gateways without having to edit the configmap + restart contour instances.

Author: I think that it's better to be explicit for now. We can revisit this later if the configuration proves too complicated. This way we can avoid a more complicated state like we had for the ingress.class annotation, where the behavior if you don't specify a value is not straightforward.

### Combining Service APIs with other configuration

When it calculates the Envoy configuration using the DAG, Contour layers different types of configuration in order.
So, currently, Ingress is overwritten by HTTPProxy, so if an Ingress and a HTTPProxy specify the exact same route, the HTTPProxy will win.

Once we have the Service-APIs available as well, we have to choose the order.
In this design, I suggest having the order be Ingress is overwritten by HTTPProxy, is overwritten by the service-apis.

> I could see reversing HTTPProxy and the Service APIs here, but I think this acknowledges that the Service APIs are really an evolution of the ideas in HTTPProxy, and will probably end up being the community standard.

Reviewer: Some aspects of this are not entirely clear to me, e.g. what if there's a service-apis Listener with a wildcard domain name that overlaps with an HTTPProxy with a specific domain name, or what if some other service-apis Listener settings conflict with Contour's listener settings -- but I'm also not sure it's that important right now, and we can figure it out during implementation.

Author: I think the wildcard domain name thing will be sorted out by implementing wildcard domains everywhere - we should do that before starting with this, since we need to do it for Ingress v1 anyway. I think the limited form of wildcard FQDN defined in the service-apis is probably implementable in HTTPProxy as well.

I think the LIstener settings details should be sorted out during implementation, but I think that the service-apis spec should probably override the Contour config one, since it's more specific (I think). I don't think it matters really, as long as we document it.

- Conflicts within a Gateway will result in the relevant Listeners both being rejected (as there is no way to determine which one was first).
- Listeners are considered mergeable if all the fields out of `hostname`, `port`, and `protocol` match, with some additional rules around TLS.
- Further merging rules are specified in the detailed design below.
- Listeners that refer to any other Route than HTTPRoute or TLSRoute will be ignored, and a condition placed on the corresponding `status.listeners[]` object saying that it was ignored because those objects are not supported.

The Gateway may supply TLS config, in which case it is used as a default.
The TLS config may be overridden by HTTPRoutes if the Gateway `spec.listeners[].tls.routeOverride` is set to `Allow`.
This allows the Gateway to configure a default TLS certificate.
Note that this feature has fiddly interactions with the various places in which a hostname may be specified;
this will require careful test case design.

The output of this watcher is both Envoy configuration, and a list of kind/name/namespace details for Routes to watch.

Contour will only update the `status` of Gateway objects.

### HTTPRoute

> Contour will watch all HTTPRoute objects, and filter for entries matching a label selector in its configured Gateway's `spec.listeners[].routes`,

Reviewer 5: Did I understand it correctly that `HTTPRoute` and `TLSRoute` resources are first selected from Gateway's own namespace or from namespaces listed in Gateway's `spec.listeners[].routes.namespaces` (if given), and after that optional label selector `spec.listeners[].routes.selector` is applied (if given).  With the current wording this two level process might be bit unclear. 
 
Since the selection logic is more `Gateway` topic, it could be moved from HTTPRoute and TLSRoute chapters to Gateway chapter, but it is readable as it is today as well.

By the way, the new "inclusion" logic seems to solve #2206.

Author: Yes, you're correct @tsaarni. I'll try and update this to be closer to the spec.

Also, yes, I know that #2206 is partially solved by HTTPRoutes, although they currently cannot be included in themselves (so you can only do the equivalent of one layer of HTTPProxy includes). There was a vision of doing that initially for the service-apis, but I'm not sure where it's at, and it would add significant complexity to processing of the HTTPRoute objects.

and will configure the associated routes.
Configuration of HTTPRoutes will be subject to the rules around the `RouteGateways` field.

When a HTTPRoute specifies a hostname or slice of hostnames, those hostnames must match the hostnames in the Gateway.
Note that more specific precise matches at the Hostname level may match less specific wildcard matches at the Gateway level.
This allows the Gateway to define a default TLS certificate, which may only be overridden

The HTTPRoute also has a facility to supply additional TLS Config using the `tls` stanza (the RouteTLSConfig field).
The most important part here is that the field is only used if the `AllowRouteOverride` field is set in the referencing Gateway resource.

Contour will only ever update the `status` of HTTPRoute objects.

> Errors or conflicts here will render that section of the config invalid.

Reviewer 2: For a missing `serviceName` or `LocalObjectReference`, the docs say: 
```
If the referent cannot be found, the route must be dropped from the Gateway. The controller should raise the “ResolvedRefs” condition on the Gateway with the “DegradedRoutes” reason. The gateway status for this route should be updated with a condition that describes the error more specifically.
```

Does that mean the entire `HTTPRoute` is invalid or just the specific `HTTPRoute.HTTPRouteRule` is invalid?

Reviewer 3: Yeah I wasn't sure about that either (and how it would play with the proposal you had around keeping as much routability as possible even in partially applied resources), I think we chatted about this in office hours or something but I'm not sure there was a conclusion

Author: You're right, I think we need to implement this per the spec for now, and raise this upstream as a concern.

Reviewer 2: Chatting in Slack the thought is that only that HTTPRoute.Rule is invalidated so I think the design is correct unless we want to specifically call it out better: https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CR0H13KGA/p1612463856030500?thread_ts=1612459180.030400&cid=CR0H13KGA

Author: Thanks for asking this question in the upstream Slack @stevesloka. I agree with Harry's answer there - we will implement this as "conflicts will invalidate that *rule*" not "conflicts with invalidate the whole Route" for now, and see if we can push that upstream.
